hi everyone its Emily bringing you
another micro class this week I thought
it'd be fun to focus on ferns
I'll admit that before I started working
at grass River which as you know is a
very in the nature Natural Area that's
very heavy on the wetland ecosystems I
did not know a lot about ferns but since
then I've become pretty excited about
them they're neat because they are ferns
as a group are 400 million years old to
put that in perspective the dinosaurs
went extinct 65 million years ago so
they're super old as a group of plants
and they used to be the dominant plant
type in our forests after or before they
got out competed by gymnosperms which
are like cone-bearing plants like pines
and spruces and then angiosperms which
are flowering plants um but they're
super neat in that they do not have
seats they reproduce by spores or
vegetatively and the spores are often
clustered on the underside of the leaves
in little stacks called sporangium and
then those sacks are clustered on sorai
under the leaves which are visible to
the naked eye and those none of them are
really reproducing quite yet since it's
so early in the season but you'll be
able to see that later on as the season
progresses and let's see I guess one
thing I should mention early on is that
one of the easiest ways to identify
ferns is based on how many times they're
divided or how many times the fronds are
cut so I'm going to show you guys an
example of what I mean by that so here
we have a Bracken fern and this is cut
three times or we call it being sliced
divided three times divided so this is
one frond right here one frond and that
is cut once
twice and then I don't know if you can
see these tiny little leaflets are also
divided they're also compound so cut
once twice three times and that's a
really easy way to start separating out
groups of ferns that will go a long way
towards identification but also for
Bracken ferns we should talk about that
they are very tall in general you can
see this one very tall they'll get to
about waist height in the summer and
there the fronds are often divided in
three so we have this triangular frond
this triangular blade and then this
triangular blade right here so three
blades that are all triangle-shaped and
there isn't another type of fern that's
this tall that has those three
triangular blades and breadth and fern
is probably the most common friend we
have here in Michigan it loves to grow
in open areas and it likes full Sun
which is not what we typically think of
as a fern characteristic and it love it
can grow in poor soils - so like along
roadsides as well as in openings and
clearings
alright so here we are on the fern trail
very aptly named and I mentioned in the
earlier section that ferns reproduce by
spores but they can also reproduce
vegetatively meaning by rhizomes which
creep under the ground and then pop up a
new fern right there so those that means
that those ferns are all clones of the
parent fern and that causes a lot of
ferns to grow in dense patches or
colonies which is what we're seeing here
with the sensitive fern it's growing
kind of in a little patch right here in
sensitive ferns like to reproduce raised
ominously and it's called sensitive fern
because it's very sensitive to frost and
to drought at the first early frost and
fall it just dies back it's very
sensitive and it's unique unlike most
other ferns in
it's only once divided so you can see
here's a frond and then it's just cut
once
right there and then the it has very
wavy margins but they're not divided so
just once divided and it's a very light
bright green sort of color and it's
important for wildlife because the
Fertile fronds
so this fern actually has different
fronds different types of fronds
it has vegetative fronds so the leaves
like this and then it'll have fertile
fronds which have the spores on them and
those persist through the winter time
and they stick up out of the snow really
common sight to see in the winter and
wild turkeys and other wildlife really
love to eat them in the winter it's a
very important source of food for them
and those lean times yeah so that
sensitive fern okay here we have one of
my favorite ferns it's tiny it's so
diminutive and it really won't grow much
more than this it never really gets
higher than about nine inches this is
the oak fern and it looks like a mini
Bracken fern in that the frond is
divided into three triangular blades
it's very bright yellow green and you
can see that the blades are very
strongly horizontal they're almost
parallel to the ground there have been a
very horizontal plane that's very
characteristic of our little tiny oak
fern okay so here we have cinnamon fern
and it is Jim is starting to unfurl from
its fiddlehead that's what all ferns are
called when they're still rolled up like
this and you can see that the
fiddleheads are very furry it's like a
whitish rusty Brown sort of fur and it
also is fuzzy down
the stems down here on the Stipe and
that's a characteristic of sensitive
cinnamon fern it will retain all this
fuzz throughout the whole growing season
on the on the Stipe and also on the
under side of where the leaflets meet
the stem and you can see I just picked
this up this is um a stem from last year
that it's very fuzzy right here very
fuzzy and also it's called cinnamon fern
because for this for this reason because
the this fur is kind of cinnamon colored
but also the Fertile frond
so like sensitive fern cinnamon fern has
fraud a fertile from that looks very
different than its vegetative fronds
so the Fertile frond grows up from the
middle of the clump cuz cinnamon Fern
Grows in a clump like this almost like a
vase shape the Fertile frond will grow
up from the center and it will be tipped
with a very cinnamon colored I guess
that's where the spores are so cinnamon
colored spores in the in the surah in
the sporangia and if you want a great
example of a cinnamon fern eye right now
and right near the bench on the new
boardwalk just east of trail post 18 and
there are two fantastic examples of
cinnamon ferns right here and when these
fiddleheads unfurl the leaves will be
twice divided so cut two times all right
that's all I have for you guys today I
hope I inspired you to fall in love with
ferns like I have they're so delicate
and lush and beautiful and I should
mention that these are not the only
ferns we have that grass River we have
lots more like maidenhair fern and wood
burns and Marshburn Xibalba ferns and
New York ferns and royal ferns and lots
more so this is a great place to come
check out your ferns if you feel so
inclined thanks for joining me on this
grass river micro class and
I will see you guys next week bye